---
title: "LS Paint"
published: true
---
LS Paint is a veeeeery old project. In fact, I believe it's the first
big project I ever started. This was back in year 12, when I decided I should probably
learn to code beyond what I'd done in GCSE Computing. And what I'd done in GCSE Computing
was... *one* program. It was a text-based maths quiz. Suffice to say, I was a bit in
over my head deciding to make a clone of Microsoft Paint. But I went and did it anyway,
and it worked. More or less. Kind of.

Revisiting this one made me cringe a little bit. The code could have been better. It
could have been worse, but it could have been a *loooooot* better. So I made it better.
And now it's not so bad. There are still probably some adjustments I could make, since
I didn't want to start from scratch, but I'm happy with how it turned out.

One amusing feature of the original version is how image saving was handled. Originally,
drawing on the TkInter canvas would simultaneously draw to a PIL image, which is what would be
exported when you save your masterpiece. This, either due to differences in how TkInter
and PIL implement certain functions, or due to discrepancies in my code,
meant that a saved image would always look *slightly* different to what you had actually
drawn on the canvas. I just didn't know how to export the contents of a TkInter canvas, and
I think I recall reading that this was the best solution. Thankfully, my Google search skills
have evolved since, and now I know how to export the contents of a TkInter canvas.

Most of the features aren't new, and have been hanging around since I first started
and gave up on this project years ago. One thing I could never got to work back then
was the selection tool. I've spent a lot of time on that during this revival process,
and it's still not *quite* there, so you won't find it if you run the program as of
writing. It's definitely doable though, and something for me to revisit if/when I
decide I want to work on this project again.

For now, though, I'm happy with my proof of concept, and glad to get it out in a working
(and not completely embarassing) state.

Thanks for reading,

Luke

---

Check out LS Paint [here](https://github.com/lukeshorejones/ls-paint).
