---
title: "Traits and More - RPG Test v2.3"
published: true
---
It's been a while since my second blog post, but between university work and my
slightly less productive hobbies, I've not found anywhere near enough time to
spend coding. *Especially* not the monster that is RPG Test.

RPG Test is easily the single project I've put the most hours into, and it
deserves a much deeper dive into its design and the different challenges it has
posed over its lifespan. But for now I'll just talk about its most recent
update, version 2.3.

The main feature of version 2.3 is the trait system. Traits are passive
abilities that player-controlled units possess. For exmaple, Gallus, the sword-wielding unit
included in the default single player party, has the Guardian trait. This trait
allows him to protect his adjacent allies from enemies' attacks, taking
damage in their place while still allowing them to counterattack the enemy. This
pairs well with his high constitution, but also requires some consideration, for
two reasons. First, your units must be positioned more specifically than before,
so making use of this trait requires you to sacrifice some versatility.
Furthermore, Gallus himself will be receiving much more damage, including from
enemies who couldn't normally reach him. This is especially problematic with
Gallus' low resistance stat, which makes him very susceptible to magic attacks,
such as from ranged staff users. The point I'm trying to illustrate here is that
these traits, in theory, make the game much more tactical.

The other two main features of this update supplement the traits, and they go
hand in hand. Through settings.yml, you can now change the difficulty of the
game's single player mode. You'll be able to switch the difficulty in the game,
too, when I stop being lazy. There are three difficulty levels: easy, normal and
hard. In normal mode, standard units will have the same stat distribution that
you might remember, but changing the difficulty will change the enemies' stats
appropriately.

That's all well and good, but it's not that exciting. This is where the third
new feature comes in - elite units. In single player mode, certain units on a
map will be elite units, marked by a crown icon above their health bars. Elite
units have higher stats than regular units, as you might have guessed. But more
importantly, elite units have traits, just like player-controlled units!

At least... that's how it works in normal mode. In easy mode, elite units won't
have any traits. And in hard mode, every enemy unit will have a trait, elite or
not! This should make hard mode a much more exciting experience, especially as
more traits are added in the future (there are currently six implemented - one
for each unit used in a multiplayer battle).

Like most of the game, traits can be customised, and you can even add more.
Trait effects are hard-coded, but you can set your own trait names, icons,
descriptions and even change some of the tuning (such as setting a modifier
for how much damage a unit with the Guardian trait takes when protecting another
unit). The stat distributions of units in each difficulty level can be edited,
in case hard mode just isn't hard enough, and you can set which units
in a map are elite in the map's data.yml file (the numbers relate to the numbers
labeling the enemy spawn locations in map.tmx).

And that's it! In future I hope to make more traits, and make more of the
available options customisable in-game, such as difficulty level. I also intend
to add different win conditions to different maps. Finally, I want to add a new
menu, which appears just as you start a game. This would allow you to preview
the map, see information on it (such as its win condition), and customise your
party without going into settings.yml. These features will likely be the content
of version 2.4, give or take some things. We'll see what happens. :)

Thanks for reading,

Luke
